Well, now we come to the true highlight of our Gilead graduation program, a talk by a
member of the governing body, Brother Stephen Lett.
You know, 33 years ago, when I attended ministerial training school, Brother Lett was one of
my instructors, and I've been learning from him ever since.
His theme for us today is imitate the great teacher.
I don't believe a word of it.
During his earthly ministry, Jesus expelled demons.
He healed the sick.
He fed multitudes.
He even raised the dead.
But was he known as the great demon expeller, the great healer, the great feeder of multitudes,
or the great resurrector?
No.
But he was known as the great teacher.
Why?
Because he focused primarily his efforts on the preaching and teaching work.
But now, why did he do this?
Well, he knew physical miracles would only bring temporary benefits.
He knew once freed from the demons, ones that were healed, fed, even resurrected, would
eventually grow old and die.
So how could he help people permanently?
Well, he knew only he could do it by teaching them the life-saving knowledge about his
father, Jehovah.
He well knew the truthfulness of what he stated as recorded at John 173.
This means everlasting life.
They're coming to know the only true God and of the one he sent, Jesus Christ.
So even though he did many amazing things, he focused primarily on the preaching and teaching
work, becoming the greatest teacher ever to walk this earth.
In fact, when officers were sent to arrest him, remember what happened?
They came back empty handed.
Why?
Well, they said, never has any man spoken like this.
They were so awestruck by his teaching.
They couldn't even bring themselves to arrest him.
Large crowds would stick with him for days, even without eating, in order to listen to
his teaching.
In contrast to the quality of Jesus' teaching, Acts 20 tells us about the Apostle Paul
giving a long, long talk.
And during that talk, rumor, the young man Uticus sank into a deep, deep sleep.
And even fell out of the third story window of a building.
Now of course, Paul resurrected him, but probably he felt responsible for putting him to sleep
like that.
But no offense to Paul, I'm sure he was doing the best he could.
But obviously his teaching was not on a par with that of the great teacher.
And that makes me think of what a brother said to me in a teasing way.
He said, Brother let, I always look forward to your talks.
I know I'm going to wake up totally refreshed.
Well, it's really true none of us, like Paul, can begin to match the quality of teaching
of the great teacher.
But what are we told at first Peter 221?
We are told to follow his steps closely.
We can't do it perfectly.
But we're told to do it as closely as we can.
So that means that all of us, but especially as we're talking to you dear Gilead students
soon to be graduates, you must make the preaching and teaching work a priority.
And we must do our best.
You must do your best to improve in your teaching.
And how can you do that by imitating the great teacher?
Using this talk, even though much of what we will talk about will concern the public
ministry, what we're going to discuss, much of it would be applicable to teaching on a
personal level and in the congregation.
So especially you brothers, but all of us, we want to imitate Jesus teaching methods
as we shepherd Jehovah sheep on a personal level.
And as we do so on a congregational level from the platform.
Now here's a question, how did Jesus become the great teacher?
Well, the Bible tells us that for eons and eons of time, as a master worker beside the
Jehovah, he carefully observed and he imitated his father.
And he thereby acquired amazing teaching skills.
See, he learned from the greatest teacher.
And no wonder he became the great teacher.
He learned from his heavenly father.
And he appropriately gave credit where it belonged.
A go to John chapter 8, please.
And notice how he gave the credit for his speaking and teaching where it belonged.
John 8, the be part of verse 28, I do nothing of my own initiative.
But just as a father taught me, I speak these things.
Yes, he imitated his father.
Now we want to imitate him.
But what specific teaching methods did he utilize?
Did he learn from the greatest teacher?
Well, let's discuss four.
Now one, he taught with enthusiasm and conviction.
He used 729 for he was teaching them as a person having authority and not as there's
scribes.
So did not indicate enthusiasm, conviction, authority, he taught.
So if we're not enthusiastic about what we teach in the ministry or from the platform,
how can we expect our listeners to be enthusiastic about it?
So never would we want to come across half-hearted in our teaching.
Just like enthusiastic teaching is contagious, half-hearted teaching is contagious too, isn't
it?
You could perhaps liken it to yawning.
The one person yawning in a room pretty soon everybody's yawning.
And that could be the way with half-hearted teaching.
But as a caution, we don't want to be theatrical in our speaking.
That means we wouldn't want to use extreme gestures or dramatic expressions, overly theatrical,
even theatrical.
Why?
Because now you end up drawing attention to yourself, don't you?
Rather than to what we're teaching.
And that's emphasis in the wrong place, isn't it?
But now let's talk about a second method, the great teacher utilized.
He was a good listener.
How did he learn this pattern of being a good listener?
We'll open up to Isaiah chapter 50, please.
And notice what it's prophetically said about Jesus and where he learned to be a good listener.
Notice chapter 50 and right at the end of verse 4, let's begin there.
He, Jehovah, awakens my ear to listen like the taught ones.
The sovereign Lord Jehovah has opened my ear, and I was not rebellious.
I did not turn in the opposite direction.
So Jehovah opened his ear, trained in to be a good listener, and he responded well.
Did he?
Not.
And that's why when he became a human, from childhood on, he continued his pattern of being
a good listener, didn't he?
You recall the account in Luke chapter 2.
And Joseph and Mary finally found Jesus after three days, and he was only 12 years old.
Where do they find him?
It says he was sitting in the midst of the teachers there in the temple and listening to them.
And then also asking them questions.
Then when he began his career as a disciple maker, at 30, it was second nature, wasn't it,
to be a good listener.
Now think of this.
You know, he had more to say than any other human has ever had to say.
He knew the value of pausing, drawing out his audience, and then really listening to
them.
And the same is true with us, see, you may think, especially after Gilead school, you've
got a lot to say.
But if you're going to imitate the great teacher, we have to use self-control, we have to pause
and draw people out, and then really listen to them.
And when we serve as an assistant, which sometimes is half the time, we want to be active
listeners.
See, what does that mean to be an active listener?
Well, maybe you would nod periodically in agreement, or maybe you would add some little
comment, well, it's very interesting.
You might even ask for clarification.
People like to clarify what they're saying, say, shows you're really interested in what's
happening.
So whether we're the one presenting or the one as an assistant, we want to be an active
listener.
There's probably nothing more distracting than having you're an assistant playing with
a dog, or maybe looking down the street, see what's happening down the street, pretty
soon your household is looking down the street, see what's happening, see, be an active
listener.
Well, let's get our third method, the great teacher used.
He used thought-provoking questions.
And methods two and three do go hand-to-hand, don't they?
Because if you ask good questions, you're likely going to have more to listen to.
But what if some of Jehovah's people tend to shy away, perhaps from using questions?
What do they just like to present information, a kind of control, everything?
Well, if you think about it, it's probably easier just to present information, even though
not nearly as effective.
See, when you ask questions and then you get a response from the householder, it's
kind of like bouncing a football.
Now, you bounce a basketball is predictable, not a football.
And the same way, people come back with all kinds of responses and you've got to be willing
and able to adapt according to their responses.
Some don't like that uncertainty, so they would rather just present information.
But as we said, that's not going to be nearly as effective as those who have learned to imitate
the great teacher and effectively teach with questions.
Now you, Gilea's students, have certainly seen the value of good questions during class.
See, it made it so much more enjoyable, didn't it?
It enhanced your learning tremendously when your instructors use these good questions.
Why is that more effective to proficiently use questions?
Well, for one thing, you involve your listener in the conversation.
And what do you enjoy more being given a sermon or being involved in a conversation?
Answer is obviously that.
So you involve the listener more enjoyable.
Another thing, you gain valuable information about your listener, which you can use to
really help that one.
Well, what are types of questions we can use?
You can use what do you think questions?
Jesus used them as an example, Matthew 1812, what do you think?
If a man has 100 sheep, one sprays, we know the rest of the illustration, but he started
out, what do you think?
People generally like to give their opinion.
And in a sense, there's no wrong answer, is there?
Because whatever they say, that's what they think.
That's what you ask for, right?
You ask, what do you think?
And people like to give their opinion, it makes it enjoyable.
You can also use multiple choice questions.
That sometimes makes it easier for the householder to answer.
Jesus gave an example in Matthew 1725.
He said, Simon, from whom do the kings of the earth receive duties or headtax?
From their sons or from the strangers?
Many of our tracks use multiple choice questions, don't they?
And we can effectively use those.
And if you think about it, the right question can often enable us to overcome potential
conversation stoppers and keep the conversation going.
For example, if a person says, you people don't believe in Jesus, we might say, well, may
I please ask, what do you say that?
Did someone tell you that about us?
See, harmless questions can keep that conversation going until you get valuable information
that perhaps you can use to help the person.
Person says, I don't believe in the Bible.
May I please ask, why you feel that way?
May I ask, how long have you felt that way?
See, keep it going.
One brother said during Pioneer's School, he had those questions drilled into his head
about, why don't you feel that way, how long have you felt that way?
A woman came to the door, said, I can't talk him pregnant.
And he says, well, may I ask, how long you felt that way?
Don't do that.
We said before, you got to be a good listener.
But then, what about using thought-provoking questions when conducting a Bible study?
As you well know, our new study book is loaded with thought-provoking questions, isn't?
And we certainly want to fully utilize them.
But occasionally, we may need to add auxiliary questions.
But remember, most of what a good teacher says during a Bible study is in the form of
questions.
I know myself, I've really tried hard to train myself when I'm about ready to make a statement,
say something, wait a minute, let me change that, let me change it to a question, and
let me draw out from the student what I was about to say.
See, that's going to be more effective, isn't it?
It's normally much better than explaining a scripture to a student, having the student
explain it to you.
And don't be afraid of a little silence.
See, if you ask a question and they're silence, some of us think, well, we have to quickly
fill in the gap by saying something.
But if they're thinking, let them think.
Of course you have to know your student.
If they have no clue what the answer is, then don't let them just sit there and sizzle.
Throw them a rope, throw them an auxiliary question.
But now we're going to go to our fourth method that the great teacher learned from the greatest
teacher, he effectively used illustrations.
And that was certainly a powerful teaching tool, indeed.
Matthew 1334, without an illustration, Jesus would not speak.
But here's a question.
Do you think that Jesus illustrations were the product of spur of the moment thinking?
Well, there's no doubt about it.
His perfect brain certainly helped to be able to come up with amazing illustrations.
But nevertheless, the indication is that he cultivated the ability to effectively use
illustrations.
If he saw a shepherd, for example, taking care of a sheep, he likely meditated.
Now how can I use this situation to teach vital truths?
He did the same when he saw, for example, a fisherman letting down his nets, a farmer
sewing seed, maybe builders constructing a tower, see, how can I use this and make powerful
illustrations to teach vital truths?
Even simple items, like birds, lilies, a lamp on a lampstand, a wine-skin, leaven, mustard
seed, salt, the young child.
How can I use these simple items to teach vital truths?
And he was amazing how he did that.
And the same is true with us, see, all around us, if we train ourselves to think that way.
There are circumstances, there are situations, there are even just items that we can use
and make them into powerful illustrations, and we can powerfully elevate the quality
of our teaching.
Now here's an example.
Sometime ago, a brother noticed a little baby with a pacifier.
This pacifier had been dipped in sugar water, put in the baby's mouth, and he was thinking,
you know, that's a very good illustration of many, many in Christendom.
They're satisfied what they have.
Even though they have no real spiritual nourishment, but we're looking for those who are not satisfied,
those who are conscious of their spiritual need, and he was able to use that in a talk.
What are cautions regarding the use of illustrations?
Well, here's just a couple.
And illustrations should not be too long or complicated.
If it is, simplify it or discard it.
That's what the school guidebook tells us.
Here's another caution.
To be effective, the illustration must be familiar to and fit your audience.
For example, what if you use the illustration, Satan's system is like a male platypus.
Now, in some parts of Australia, that might be a good illustration.
Because they know a male platypus looks harmless.
He looks innocent, but his fine legs are armed with ankle spurs, connected to venom glands.
So he looks harmless, but he could be very dangerous.
But that only works, see, if you're dealing with people that are familiar with that particular animal.
But skillfully selected and used illustrations are very effective.
They stimulate thinking, they arrest and hold attention,
they motivate the heart and conscience of our listener,
and they serve as powerful memory aids.
See, a good illustration is going to be remembered years later along with,
and this is an important thing, along with a point that it was designed to highlight.
Well, there we have four teaching methods utilized by the great teacher,
that he learned from the greatest teacher, as we said.
And we want to do our best to copy, imitate his way of teaching.
And I know you, Gilly of students, you have an enhanced desire to do that.
In the congregation and also in your territory that you're going to be working in.
So let's work hard to teach with enthusiasm and conviction.
Let's be a good listener.
Let's use thought provoking questions.
And let's use effective illustrations.
If you work hard, your dear students almost graduates to employ the same teaching techniques,
then you're going to be a lot more skillful in reaching the hearts of your listeners.
And there's a lot of stake, isn't it?
I mean, you think about it.
The lives of our brothers and sisters are at stake.
And with the art of teaching learned from the great teacher,
we want to help as many of them as we can to make it into that new world.
And then also the lives of honest, arted ones in our territory.
They hang in the balance, don't they?
So we want to find them before it's too late.
And using the art of teaching learned from the great teacher,
we want to motivate them to come into this safety of Jehovah's organization.
And if you think about it, it's good to remember that what we're doing now
in the way of learning to teach is really preparing us
for the greatest teaching campaign ever in all human history,
the teaching of billions who will be coming back in the resurrection.
You could say, our work now is like a warm-up, isn't it?
It's a warm-up for that greatest teaching campaign
that is just around the corner.
So please continue to observe carefully the teaching of the great teacher.
And you learn a lot about that in school, no doubt about it.
And make Jehovah continue to bless you most, be loved.
Gilead students, almost graduates, may he bless you
as you apply all the wonderful things you've learned during this school.
And that includes learning to imitate the great teacher.
Well, we sincerely thank you, Brother Lett,
for those very practical comments about learning to be a good teacher.
It was very, very much appreciated.
Well, now's the time for us to present the diplomas
and Brother Kenneth Lodin, a helper to the teaching committee, is going to assist.
He's going to do the hard part mentioning all the names.
The first couple here is Brother and Sister Agustino
and they're going back to the Angola branch.
We all miss this one.
And this is Brother An Song going back to Britain branch.
And we have diplomas for both Brother and Sister Arto
going to the Spain branch.
Wonderful.
Two right here.
Brother and Sister Brown are being assigned to the Japan branch.
Wonderful.
Congratulations.
And Brother and Sister Divine are going to remain here in the United States
and serve at the branch.
Brother and Sister Kanji return to the Cameroon branch.
And this is Brother and Sister Kopenan
and they'll be returning and serving at the Finland branch.
Brother and Sister Kanhaos return to Canada branch.
Congratulations.
These people look familiar.
Brother and Sister Kunda returned to Zambia.
Two more familiar ones here.
Brother and Sister Lee go back to Micronesia.
Brother and Sister Lin will be going back to the Taiwan branch.
Here we have Brother and Sister Mahbunda going back to Mozambique.
And Brother and Sister Matanda will be returning to Zambia.
Now Brother Matanda had a medical situation
and sadly he's not able to be with us today.
But he will be getting his diploma, OK?
Congratulations.
Brother Mazmanyan will be returning to Armenia.
Brother and Sister Mahbunda will be going back to Romania.
And this is Brother Macumbi returning to Zambia.
And Brother and Sister Peter are going to return to Fiji
and serve at the branch there.
Brother and Sister Rock are going to return to Czech Slovak branch.
And this is Brother and Sister Saladino.
They're going to remain in the United States and serve at the branch.
Brother and Sister Simone are going to return spiritually well fed
to the hungry branch.
And that's it, Brother Bon Bosnia.
He's going back to Tahiti.
What a beautiful class.
And don't you think Brother Flodin did well with all of those names?
Well, it gives me very great pleasure to introduce you now
to the graduates of the 153rd class of Gilead.
Brother Yani Kaupinen is going to read a letter from the class.
To the governing body, dear brothers.
At the end of five memorable months,
we feel moved to echo the words of first John 4, 16.
We have come to know and believe the love that God has for us.
One way we experience this love was by your fine example
as it will us that your helpers.
We did not expect and will never forget you sacrificing your precious time and energy
to provide us lectures, interviews and event tours.
As a result, we learnt first hand from your love, humility and burning zeal for Jehovah.
Our course of intensive Bible study has deepened our appreciation for the timely
and upbuilding spiritual food available to all of God's people.
We are also deeply grateful to you for providing us with selfless and skillful instructors.
These gifts in men imparted their souls to us each day
and regularly made our hearts burn with appreciation.
Carefully, considering the entire Bible chronologically,
has given us a deeper understanding of how Jehovah thinks.
It has also increased our sensitivity to how he feels.
Our in-depth consideration of Jesus' ministry made us eyewitnesses to God's love
being revealed through him.
We learnt that opposite of love is self-isness.
We can only show genuine unselfish concern for others with the help of Holy Spirit,
such selfless love empowers us to bring out the best in ourselves and others.
We experienced this in action through the warm hospitality and overwhelming kindness
shown by the United States' better family who abound in love for one another and for all.
This beautiful family has a permanent place in each of our hearts.
Thank you for the priceless gift of Kileot training.
Excuse me.
As we leave the Patterson, we are resolved to leave it by the words of 1 John for 11.
If this is how God loved us, then we are also under obligation to love one another.
We are determined to never forget what we saw and heard.
Kileot, excuse me, Kileot has enchanged our desire and ability to serve Jehovah
and our brothers better each day, stabilizing Jehovah's organization one precious sheep at the time.
We love you, dear brothers.
Your brothers and sisters, 153, Kileot, bless.
Well, at the outset of our program, we discussed the initial reluctance of Gideon and Moses
and Jeremiah and Brother Booth to accept assignments.
But in the final analysis, they all followed through and they did what Jehovah commissioned
them to do.
Well, we want to imitate them.
We want to trust that if Jehovah is allowing us to serve, even if we might feel very, very
inadequate, he sees something good in us and he'll make up for any lack that we feel.
But here's a caution.
Never go to the other extreme.
Never become overconfident and step beyond the authority that you may be given.
Now in this regard, there's an interesting account that I want to just very briefly share
with you.
It's in 2 Kings, chapter 14.
2 Kings, chapter 14.
Now as you're turning there, in this account, we read about King Amazaya of Judah.
Now he had experienced a great victory over the Edomites and now he wanted to go to war
against Israel.
But King Jehoash sent him a few words of advice.
And I wanted to just read these words, these few words, and especially draw attention to
one sentence.
So would you read it with me?
2 Kings 14 and verse 10.
So he said, true, you have struck down Edom, so your heart has become arrogant.
Now here's the point.
Now here's the sentence I want you to draw attention to.
Enjoy your glory, but stay in your own house.
Isn't that a great lie?
I'm going to read it one more time.
Enjoy your glory, but stay in your own house.
Why should you provoke disaster and fall, bringing Judah down with you?
Well what's the point?
You see, Jehoash said to Amazaya, enjoy the victory.
Yeah, you want a victory, enjoy it, don't get a big head, don't push it, stay in your
own house.
Some Bible translations say stay at home.
Well as it turned out, well you know you're Gilead graduates, you know how it turned
out, Amazaya did not listen to that advice.
He went on to fight against Israel, and as a result he suffered a humiliating defeat.
What's the lesson?
You have had a wonderful spiritual victory today.
This is no doubt going to be one of the happiest days of your entire life, graduating from
Gilead school.
Well it's right that you should enjoy this day.
You should find so much pleasure in it, and feel satisfaction in what you've accomplished.
But as you experience this joy, and in the future as you experience the joy of taking
on new assignments that will come to you, enjoy the moment, but stay in your place.
Never go beyond the limits of your responsibility or the authority that you've been given.
No assignment ever gives us the license for us to think that we are somehow superior
to our brothers or to act in that way.
So you know that one of the qualities that Jehovah saw in all of you is your humility,
your ability to consider others as superior to you and to treat them in that way.
Keep that quality and even strengthen it.
You see some who disregarded cautions like this and who succumbed to pride have like Amazaya
eventually suffered a painful defeat.
So yes, this has been an especially happy day and you have many reasons to rejoice in it.
But as you go and care for your respective assignments, remember to keep your place.
And then you'll have reason to rejoice not just on this day, your graduation day, but
every day as you carry out your ministry as the graduates of the 153rd class of Gilead.